Hello and welcome back to the course by the program in two days.
Tauriel we're going to talk about filtering doorframes.
It's going to be a quite interesting tutorial and at the same time a very useful one because filtering
doorframes That's a lot of data science is about filtering and being able to find the insides and subsetting
in that way.
Your daughter from so let's have a look at it this tutorial is going to be filter its own filtering
.
And I just asked her about filtering.
All in all it's about Rose right.
Don't filter by columns will be filtered by the columns.
But what we are filtering the target or filter is Rose.
So just think of filtering in the way you see filtering and Axelrad see that drove down and you select
which let's say which countries you want to or which income groups you want you just one high income
group and then excel.
And very quickly just removes all other income groups and leaves you for table just with the high income
groups.
Or you can say all we're afraid that are less than two or all countries with or older phrase that are
greater than 40 or all Internet users less than two or all countries starting with a something that
does what we're going to be talking about today.
Let's get into it.
That's our favorite function stats head.
There it is.
What do we see.
Our data set.
We've seen this a million times.
Let's get to the fun stuff stats.
Daut Internet to type up something very strange and then you can tell me what we will see here.
So we are saying stats dot Internet users is less than 2.
What does that going to do.
Was I going to keep us.
Let's see.
Let's have a look around that.
Interesting.
We've got some values and here we've got.
False false false false false true false false false false false and then false walls falls et cetera
.
So we've got a few trues in here and a lot of false.
Right.
So what does this do.
What does this give us.
All right so we've got this object.
And what is it going to be used for.
How is it useful to us.
Well basically what it's saying is in which Rose of this column is this condition met.
And in which it isn't met.
So what I'm saying is in the first row it's not meant this value's not less than two.
The second row it's also not met.
This value is not less than two.
So Droste not mad or let's call them correctly so in the 0 0 number 0 in row number one in all of these
it's not met and row number 11 it's met.
So the number of Internet users a percentage of Internet users in rhône number 11 is less than less
than two than its met not met or not met but met and so on.
OK beautiful.
That's lovely Carol but what are we going to use this for how is this useful to us.
Well let's say we take this and we do something even stranger will say filter will create a new object
and put this value into filters so we don't have to spell we could specify brackets here we could run
like that but Python knows right away that first you run something over here.
Then you run the equals operator and then you put it in there.
You can run it like that as well.
So if I look at filter now you'll see that we've got those values in there.
OK so things are getting very strange here.
Why do we need this object called Filter what are we going to use it for.
Well let's have a look what we're going to use it for is we going to say stats and remember how we would
we would slice by the rows and columns and would say for it would slide by Rosen would say third row
to the seventh row and it would extract the third row to the central.
Or would say we want the 30 or fro to the hundred and thirty a row.
That's what too much to say 30 or fro two I just don't want to sprint too much on the screen 30 to 40
for all right.
It would extract those values.
Well you don't have to specify exactly the row numbers in the square brackets which you also can specify
is the true false values so you can specify a list of true false values and then that way tell Python
which exactly rows you want to extract.
So here what I'm going to do is I'm going to put our filter in here so you know that filter.
Is this object with true and false.
And now we're going to parse it to stats.
Let's see how states react.
As you can see what happened is stats looks up.
Whatever was unfilter and wherever it said false it did not take that trial so it said.
All right so this falls corresponds to the row in place 0.
This falls corresponds to the wrong place once so wherever it found a false It did not take that trial
whenever it found it true.
It did take Cattrell.
So let's have a look.
Eleven is true then we don't see how many entries are in the dot dot dot that's fine.
But we also know that 172 is true.
Right.
So let's have a look here.
We see 11 true and 172 is true.
And notice that in all of these countries the percentage of Internet users is less than two.
So to quickly recap what we did is we created a filter to check.
So we used our doorframe to create a filter or we call it a filter.
Right.
So it's just between us.
In this course we're calling it a filter.
We created an object called Filter to see in which positions Internet users is less and.
Then we took this filter and we put it back into that same data set to select those rows where the filter
is true.
And that's exactly what happened.
How great is that.
And what's even greater is conceptually this is just like our.
So congratulations.
If you don't know or if you haven't learned before you already know conceptually how to create filters
and are exactly the same process.
And when you get to are you'll be able to do this if you've taken before you've learned are or if you
know a bit of art.
Then you'll find this concept very familiar and very easy to grasp and part of as well.
That's one of the beauties about these two languages.
There is a lot of similarities.
All right.
So now I can help myself but say awesome.
That was so inspiring.
And now we're going to let's use this in practice now.
All right.
We're going to say stat's dot birth rate is great and 40 right.
So if we run that we'll get all the countries where the birth rate is greater than 40.
OK.
Very interesting.
Let's now find out which countries these are so let's do the same thing put it in here.
So say filter two equals.
All right.
And now if we put that into our stats doorframe we'll get all the countries where birth rate is greater
than 40.
So as we recall that is 40 more than 40 or more doses for more than 40 children are born per every thousand
people of the population per year.
That's what that means.
So there we go.
Those are the countries as you can see a lot of these countries are actually in Africa and that is our
filter too what I want to show here is that we don't actually have to do this step we don't have to
create the filter and then put it in here.
That is just for us to understand the concept how it works what we would really do is we would just
put this in here around this.
You can see I get the same result exact same result.
Now this might come off as a bit confusing because we hear about stats and here we've got stats but
think of it always separately whenever you see something like this or especially at the start just think
of it in this sense think that we're creating the filter first.
So separate the two things we're creating the filter first grade.
That's what happened in here.
And now we're putting the filter inside starts to use it to find the rows that we're looking for.
If you think of it that way it will it will never confuse you.
It's very straightforward when you remember the way we learned it in the first place.
All right.
Beautiful.
So now we're going to look at an even more important and interesting concept even more interesting.
So let's say you want to combine those two filters that say you want to create a object or a door frame
where you have introduces less than two.
And at the same time birth rate greater than 40.
Right.
So how do you do that.
Well the first idea first intention would be birth rate greater than 40.
And we use our logical and operator in Python and stats enter and Internet users is less than 21 or
20.
Less than two and two.
So if I run this you'll see that we actually get an error.
Why do we get an error.
Why does that happen.
Very interesting concept because in our we wouldn't get an error.
That's exactly how you do it and are what is going on here.
Error.
Why.
All right let's have a look let's try to get to the bottom of this.
All right so where did you know that you can separate these two things as do.
Let's do that.
Let's go and see if the error lies in this bit in this first step.
It's not that yes indeed the error is here.
So again error.
Why.
Why do we have an error what's going on.
Well what is going on is Python is not a big surprise programming language.
And by default what this and means is it is trying to work with two single values so it's saying this
and is waiting it's expecting for a single true or false to be here and a single true or false to be
here.
And then it will combine them into either a true or a false.
So this hand doesn't know how to work with objects like this.
It doesn't know how to work with lists or doesn't know how to work with objects that have lots of values
in them which we have on either side.
So basically the error that we're getting here the truth value of a series is ambiguous.
So these are a series and the truth value of a series and because.
And what does that tell is telling us about the era that we've put the wrong thing here.
No.
Python is assuming that we did the right thing here.
It's saying that it cannot sell what we have here and what we have said here so let me replace it.
We already have filter one so we know that that is filter that is filter too.
So just for simplicity's sake let's replace them here.
And so we'll get the same error because that's exactly the same objects the way we just created them
here right.
So this filter to where you know what that object and filter what we also know that we've got that object
.
So basically what Python is saying here the truth value the three this care for the true failure of
a series is ambiguous and by the way we're learning a bit quite a bit how to deal with errors here right
how to understand them.
So filter is a series right.
It's got all these true and false filter too is also serious.
True and False as well.
So this and expects a true single true or false value here and a single true or false value here.
Let me just move this a bit and therefore what is it's doing so implicitly what you're doing you're
saying by putting this.
And you're saying OK.
Python says that this should be a single value.
Let's try to convert this filter to a single value just this series to a single value.
And same thing here.
This series has to be converted to a single value but in reality that is not a straightforward operation
.
First of all it's not what we want right.
We want this to be done on a vectorized level or on an element by element level like we did with addition
and subtraction and division multiplication.
Even the comparisons here.
They've been done on a level on an A level by level on a element by element level.
Right so every single element is being compared to 40.
Every single element has been compared to two.
So that's what we want.
The behavior we want here.
But that's not what's going to happen.
And moreover while Python is trying to convert the series to a true a single true false value it can
see that this series does have a look at it.
You can see that the series has falses and trues.
And how do you convert a series of falses and trews into a single true or false value.
So on one hand somebody might speculate that if everything is true then the series should be true.
Somebody else might speculate that if there is at least one true then the series should be true and
that's what it means.
Where we get this error the truth value is used is ambiguous.
So it's not even warning us that we put the wrong thing here it's saying that OK assuming you put the
right thing here I can get this to be a single true or false value I can't get this to be a single true
or false.
So how do we deal with this error.
Well in python we need to specify different operation different ampersand or different and logical aberration
which is the ampersand which is a bit.
Why is unperson and this one will do it.
Elmander elements if I run that you will see we've got filter and filter too.
And in this case what's going on is only when both conditions are met.
We'll get a true.
So let's go ahead and try to put this into our stats out of frame stats for on this.
You'll see now I've got countries with birthrate or 40 Internet users under 2.
Now first of all this.
Verify.
Let's see.
We know that here we've got over 40.
Right.
So let's see how many it is under 2.
This one's under 2.
This one's under two and this one's under two.
So there's three and that's correct.
That's good verification.
Now let's go ahead and try use this approach.
Right.
Let's go stat's square brackets this approach and let's replace this for the ampersand.
Again we get an error.
What's going on why so many errors.
Well in this case counters Complera a float array with a scalar or type of type Boolean.
So basically what it's doing it's actually it's running one of these verses doing that.
And then is doing the comparison.
So that's what it's doing.
So in order to specify the order of operations we need to put the brackets and that will help us solve
this problem.
So if we specify the brackets it will tell Python to do this first then do this and then only compare
the results.
And that's as you can see exactly the same.
So it's a bit more involved than in our you'd need to know that that you need to specify a different
logical operator here.
The bitwise operator because this is not a vectorized programming language and Python by default doesn't
know how to do boolean comparisons between two series of data.
And also you need to specify these brackets because of Python.
Otherwise mix takes from these actions or operations in the wrong sequence.
But other than that very very similar to our the code that conceptually it's exactly the same.
We're applying two filters in our data frame.
So there we go.
We get this result exactly the result that we are looking for.
All right.
I know this has been a quite a quite an intense tutorial we learned a very very powerful skill today
.
Let's take it to what one notch higher than I'll give you a quick exercise and then we'll wrap up for
today.
All right so another one.
Just to recap and kind of look at a bit of a different example we'll say stats.
And now let's say you know.
Well let's look at stats or Ted.
Right.
Let's look at.
And now we want to extract all of the ones that have just high income group STATS.
And here again is stats dot income group remember logical operators.
It's a double equal sign high income.
And don't forget the capitalization of words matters.
If I run that I'll get all the countries with high income there's quite a lot.
Sixty seven countries when the high income group.
Very simple so very simple approach isn't creating a logical series through stats income growth or comparing
it to higher income repulsing into the stats data frame or a beautiful.
And now what else.
I wanted to show you quickly here is how to get the unique categories.
This is a categorical variable obviously.
How do we get the unique categories.
Well very simple we say stats income group and there is a function unique.
If you run that it will actually give you the value so sometimes in a doorframe you might have so many
of them you might not be able to pull them out just by looking at it.
If you want to get the uniques just get it take it like that.
High income low income upper middle income and lower middle income.
So go ahead and give us a go.
Try using one of these instead of high income.
That would be a good exercise.
But the quick exercise that I did have in mind.
Exercise.
Find out everything about maltol from this data set.
So there's a country there Multa.
How would you find the row that corresponds to this country.
Knowing what we've learned so far in this tutorial you'll be able to do that.
Click pause on this video and go ahead and give it a try.
And in three to one I'm going to show you how I would do it.
I would say stats stats again create the filter country name brand name.
And we're going to say Malta equals double equals.
Forget that was Multa.
Run that and there you go.
You've got the row corresponding to Malta.
So apparently the country code for multis MLT or the birthrate in Malta is 9.5.
So per every thousand people every year.
Nine point five people born.
So not that many.
Not 40 as we saw there was a few countries there were few countries with 40 and Internet users.
The percentage is quite high.
Sixty eight point nine percent and multiple longs to the high income group of countries they have castles
and yachts on Malta.
Malta on that island in Mediterranean.
All right there we go.
So hopefully you enjoyed the sartorial and you learn quite a bit.
The main focus of today's Statoil was filtering our doorframes and that is selecting the rows that we
want.
So basically recreating the filters that we can use in Excel if you think of it that way in Python.
Very powerful technique especially because we're using Python for data science.
We're going to be needing this quite a lot this is a special type of subsetting we are subsetting are
done a frame but it is a special type because we're doing it through the filtering approach where we're
looking for certain values that meet certain criteria or rose that means certain criteria is in certain
columns.
OK so differently.
Practice that.
It's very valid it's a very valuable skill and it needs some practice to sink into your mind and for
you to get good very comes off so that it's an on an intuitive level.
And I'll leave you at that.
I'll see you on the next tutorial.
Until then happy coding